And again, we set up to stay behind ambush. And we
pulled this off three times in one morning. And
militarily, it was very successful. And then the
next day, we had pamphlets printed up how terrible
the Viet Cong was. We were trying to serve the
people of the area for medical programs. The only
thing they wanted to do was kill us. We had their
interests in mind. These pamphlets were printed
up and dropped by aircraft over the area. You can
see how we used it, not only militarily, but
propaganda-wise. My medical program. After the
propaganda, was there any more trouble with this
sort of thing?
Oh yes. Another thing I did was that I could get free
food and clothing often. to strengthen the local
government in the area was that for anybody to get
the free food or clothing and things like this that
they had to have a VFNE's ID card, which they had to
register for and so on. And for free food and
clothing, because of the requirement I set down
and then I would have the local village chief or
whoever handle the paperwork and check the people
off and make sure they had the proper
identification before they received any. And
this way I strengthened the local officials
there. And one trick that I did was that I could get
T-shirts, children T-shirts that were basically
red with three yellow stripes diagonally across
it. And a lot of the children, say, under seven,
eight years old, didn't have a stitch of clothes on
them. And so I would, when I went into a village, I
would give them these t-shirts, and that was the
only clothes they had. And of course, these were
Viet Cong village. But this was just like having a
South Vietnamese flag. And I'm sure there was a lot
of family arguments later on over the t-shirts.
What were the major diseases of the Vietnamese
that Probably
the most deadly was pneumonia.
But saw everything. I even had at one time four
cases of rabies. Rabies, where did they pick that
up from? From a rabid dog. And in fact when I heard
about they brought in a child to me that was bitten
by a rabid dog and of course I wanted to go out and see
the dog. And I went out there and the dog evidently
followed them in the camp when they came into the
camp. And when I went out there he started to come
towards me and normally I always wore a .45 even on
sick call and I had my .45 out and was about ready to
blow it up and it died right in front of me and it was
rabid.
How did you learn to, I know you had medical
training and stuff so I'm sure that helped, but how
did you learn to cope with death?
I guess part of our training was that way because
we, at that time, at the advanced medical
training lab, which was eight weeks long after we
had approximately
say over a year of training before that, if we got
through that we went to advanced medical lab and we
had patients there and the patients were the dogs
around Fayetteville that were going to be
destroyed by the animal control anyway and what
they would do they would shoot the dog in the hind
leg with an M1 and of course this was done under very
humane conditions the dog was asleep and
everything and then we would perform surgery on
the dog to remove, to debris the dead tissue and so
on. And we had regular surgical teams like a
surgeon, assistant surgeon, scrub nurse,
anesthetist, and so on. And after a debris month,
we could not use any antibiotics to treat any
infection, but we had to treat the infection by
cleaning it out four or five times a day. And then we
would go ahead and put the dog back under
anesthetic and do a secondary closure and make
sure that healed up good without any infection.
And then the last time we put it under anesthetic,
we would do an amputation. And after the
amputation, we would actually
kill the dog with the anesthetic and since they
were going to be destroyed anyway and
if your patient did not survive, died on you, you
had to do an autopsy on the patient and then you got a
new one and you started all over again. So there was
a lot of sleepless nights taking care of your
patient during the training and I think on the
whole that they
trained us for deaf because I can remember in some
of the classes that in my final training, which was
a 13 week training period, that
two of the main instructors would inform us almost
every day of who died over in Vietnam, and I can
remember it was getting up to over 350. They would
number them, and generally, probably nine
percent of them were Special Forces, and they
would know the people, and they would tell us
something about the people. So we were very, we
knew that where we were going was not an easy place
to stay alive. Did you find that American
technology was very useful to medics? Oh yes,
because the local medicine around there, they
were using like suction cups and bleeding the
patients and things like this. And they had their
local
which doctors or whatever you want to call them
that they did a treatment. What was the strengths
and weaknesses that you saw in the American forces
in caring for the wounded? Well, of course
Americans normally could get evacuated out of the
valley area when they were wounded very rapidly to
a a field hospital and be taken, have very good care
taken of them and
with very well trained personnel and evacuated
from there back to the United States or to like
Okinawa, Japan very fast, which was full-fledged
hospitals and was excellent. How were they
evacuated usually? By trucks or by helicopters?
By choppers. What
were some weaknesses or were there any that you
could have seen been improved? Well, as far as my
unit was, we were sort of stuck out there in nowhere
and the only time we could get air support was when
we had an American hit or his life was in danger of
being there. And only one time that happened was
when one of my teammates was killed, that we got air
support. Other than that, we had no air support
whatsoever. What about the availability of
blood? Because that would seem like it would be a
vital supply. I had none. But I did have gem
garbium, which is a form of plasma, but
concentrated. As far as it went on the VF knees,
that 50 cc's of gamgobium IV was just like a unit of
blood. How was this usually transported to you? It
was regular cans and IV bottles. I generally
carried at least two of them around with me every
time I went on patrol. What were the other supplies
that you carried with you in your medical kit?
Well, basic bandages and wire splints and things
like this. It all depended on the patrol. If I was
going out to set up a medical treatment someplace,
of course I carried much larger supplies and so on
to treat with the idea of treating anywhere from 50
to maybe 200 or 300 people that day, which I had to
take a whole range of medications and antibiotics
and other things such as that. Was there ever any
problem with the supplies running low?
Sometimes.
Probably the most used medication I had was
antibiotics. And I would say, if I ever ran out, of
course I always figured on a large supply ahead and
was really planning on it, and I kept a large supply
at the camp. When the supplies would run low, And if
y'all were like invaded, were there ever, you
know, did your priorities as far as who to treat and
how to treat, did they change as a result of the
shortage in supplies at all? No, but we did have
some supplies that were for Americans only. And,
uh, uh, and, uh, uh, Basically,
it was very rare that I had to not treat someone with
a secondary
medication than the
preferred medication. I guess I'd like to shift
gears just a little bit and talk a little bit about
you as far as your experiences. How were you
injured? What were the conditions? Well,
it was not very dramatic. It wasn't any big battle.
We had a big operation going that day and
planned out the conventional pincher action that
we would send one unit well we had one unit going
north one south and then they swing around and then
we would have a major unit go west as a sweep and try
to get caught between the higher two units and a
crossfire and I was on a unit that went north which
we left you know about three or four hours early so
we could make a wide circle so they wouldn't know
what was coming and tried to do it that way and while
we were making these wide sweeps we would call in
our position and the mortars were trained from the
camp in other words they walked in front of us In
case we ran into an ambush, the only thing we had to
do was hit the radio and say, fire. And the mortars
would be firing, you know, 100, 200 yards in front
of us at all times. And what happened was I was
taking a compass reading, and a booby trap grenade
went off where I was standing, right under my feet.
And that's how I was injured. In fact, my team
sergeant claimed that he stepped on the grenade
before I did and probably primed it. And so when I
was standing on and taking the compass reading, it
exploded. And
one unusual thing was that this was, I was going on
my 11th month in Vietnam, and was the only day that I
knew that I
was going to be a casualty. I told my CO at the time
that that day was my day. Was it just intuition?
Sixth Sense. What was the extent of the injury?
The only external injury was I picked up shrapnel
wounds in my left foot and ankle and with broken
bones in my left foot. My right foot was completely
broken up and no external injuries but the
concussion, I probably, I was standing on, it went
off under my right foot and so it got most of the
concussion. which led to rupture of all the blood
vessels and therefore the foot did not get any
blood circulation so what they called dry
gangrene and seven days later they had to amputate
it because it was just a dead piece of meat. What
were your immediate thoughts? Since you had kind
of sensed it, what went through your mind as the
injury occurred? Well, it wasn't until later that
I remembered that I knew it was going to happen. The
unit I was with that went on and left me there with
two Vietnamese soldiers and I was only about a
hundred yards from the Cambodian border, which
was somewhat dangerous, and I knew that if the Viet
Cong found me there, the two Viet Minh soldiers
would have hightailed it and left me there. So my
main concern was preparing myself to fight to the
death.
immediate hospital care like in Vietnam? I can't
really say because after I got to Saigon and put in
the hospital, they gave me a shot and knocked me
out. I can't really remember anything until
approximately two or three weeks later because I
went in a coma because I had blood clots that moved
up to my brain and I received 30% brain damage from
the bug spots. When you were coming back to the
United States, what was the emotions like coming
back on the trip back?
I just wanted to get back to the States.
I know When I finally got back to the States about
three weeks later, when they went into Travis Air
Force Base, I just wanted to kiss the ground when I
got back here. What was the date that you arrived
back? I can't remember. When you got back,
you said you were at Travis.
How long were you at Travis? Just overnight. And
then I flew into here in San Antonio
to Brook Army Medical Center and I spent two and a
half years there being put back together.
What was your relations with the hospital staff
like at Brooks? Very good.
Were there any problems that you had with them at
all? A few of them with the nurses, but after I was
able to get up and get around,
most of the doctors found out of my medical
training, and when they went around to do bandage
changes on most of the other patients, they
preferred me to. work with them because my
knowledge of how to do bandage changes was
probably greater than the nurses were there. The
nurses resented this quite a bit, but that was all
right.
You got to realize I was wounded in September of 65,
and my enlistment was up in November of 65. So after
a year in the hospital, you know, my enlistment was
already a year past. And if I wanted a three-day
pass, I just would tell the doctor I wanted a
three-day pass. And he said, no, I can't give you
one. I said, okay, don't look for me. Monday or
Friday I'd take off and when I got back they had the
three day pass for me assigned. So they were very
cooperative. Well, what could they do?
I've read where there's been problems as far as for
Vietnam veterans in the hospitals. Some of the
major problems were like age gap because I know I
can I'm not sure, but it seemed like the Vietnam
veterans were much younger than most of the other
veterans in the hospital. This is only, I would
say, to the VA hospital.
When I was initially wounded in the Army
hospitals, it was mostly from Vietnam. Although
there was some soldiers there, that was their
third war.
But yet there was camaraderie. Of course there was
different things. The Marines thought they were
And of course the special forces thought they were
too. The Air Force always got the low end of the
stick.
It
was the normal thing. You got to realize that after
I was there, when I got there in the hospital there
was only six amputees and three of us was from
Vietnam and three of us from car accidents. and by
the year's time it grew up to almost a hundred
amputees there in the hospital and they had to open
up a whole ward that they were saving for national
disaster for it and make it just a purely amputee
ward. But there was some racial problems, of
course, but nothing great.
In the VA, was there ever any, did you ever find any
lack of communication between, say, the doctors
and the patients? Yes. Most of your VA hospitals
you'll find are next to medical centers or medical
schools. And you get a lot of students over there,
maybe second and third year medical students
playing doctor. And like I am, by the time I go, when
I need to go to the VA hospital for something, I
don't even know what it is and what needs to be done
and so on. And sometimes I have run runs with the
young kids and most of them don't like to be told
what to do. But on the whole I've gotten into
most of the
doctors I see most of the time are the ones I choose.
I work around and get that way, which most patients
don't know how to do. How do you go about doing this?
Well, I do homework first. If I don't like
somebody, I just tell them that, and I wish to see
somebody else. If I have to do that three or four
times, I do until I get somebody I have confidence
in, and then I go with them. It's that easy. I think
your medical... training has helped quite a bit
too. Yes. Now a lot of people they don't realize
that just recently this Freedom of Information
Act also applies to all hospitals and even the
civilians. If a civilian wants to know in a
civilian hospital why he's being treated for and
the medications and how much medication and so on
and what side effects, the hospital has to tell
you. And if you want your records from that
hospital, they have to provide them for you. And a
lot of people don't know this, but you can get real
stiff about and you get done.
In fact, this last summer when I was up in Oregon
with my mother with an accident,
I really put a few nurses through the wringer that
they thought they could slough me off. In fact,
some doctors also did that. They would say, well,
it's the administration. I would say, Well, what
do you mean by administration? Well, the Board of
Review. What's the Board of Review? Well, I said,
where the patient can pay or not, right? And they
said, yes. And I said, well, you don't have to worry
about that. That's my worry. And get things taken
care of that way. And sometimes I got pretty pushy,
but I got things done. Yeah. Have you ever run
across any dishonesty in the VA, or as far as, like,
the nurses saying things, as far as, like,
treatment or something like that? Well, the VA
system is a whole different ballgame. And, of
course, my major concern with the VA system is this
Agent Orange. And the VA has cut and dried that's
put out by Washington, the head Veterans
Administration Office, what the VA does. And the
personnel who work for the VA can't else, have to
follow those instructions, and they're very
limited. And if, I know when I went in for my initial
interview about Agent Orange, They called in the
security, because if I was getting a little too
forceful, I'd tell them what's what. But I got my
point across. And it really irked me that a nurse
did the interview and not a doctor. How do you feel
about the medical services being circumscribed
according to criteria unrelated to medical
needs. They don't look at your injuries or your
treatments that you need. They look at other
things into consideration. Well,
of course money is one of the major things.
If the VA hospital here was twice the size, it still
would be filled, I believe. I honestly believe
that. And why it's so terrible about it is that
they don't have it. And then the other
thing is the veteran is ill-informed of what his
rights are. Because when they put it out, they
either put it out in a language that a normal person
cannot understand, or they put only half-truths
out.
While you were recuperating back at Travis, were
you expected to maintain a military appearance
with the haircut? Well, at Travis I only spent
overnight. Oh. But at Brooke, yes, you were. I had
no problem with that whatsoever because I believe
in it and there was no difficulty.
Probably the biggest problem was a lack of
medical help From doctors on down, as you went
down, it got less and less. In fact, there on the
amputee ward, they wanted amputees to mop and buff
the floors and things like this. And the nurses was
always telling me to do this and do that about that.
I would tell them, well, heck, I'm an NCO. You give
me some war-ranked people and I would be
supervisor of the detail. They never could get a
detail up, so I never supervised anything.
I bet they loved you. Oh, they did.
What was the morale like back at Brooks? It
depended on
unit and normally you'll find somebody with
severe injuries such as amputation or anything
like that if the person has the will to survive and
to do what he wants to do even though with handicaps
that they will do it but if they don't they become a
there's a big difference between being
handicapped and being a cripple. And most of the
people who are cripples are because of their
mental outlook on it. They say, okay, I'm a
cripple, I will be a cripple. Not that what I can do,
I will do. And this goes for the whole spectrum.
Either I believe that either you grew up with the
thought that, with the will to overcome hardships
or you don't have it. And I think that's ingrained
in your younger years and you follow through with
it in your later years.
How did y'all, you know, like if a guy was a cripple,
how did, was there any way that you that the other
patients would try to help him to get his morale up
to show him that he could still be productive? Oh,
yeah. I know when I was there, I had, there was a guy
that had a train went over his legs and he lost both
his legs. And filling out the menu, which you
would, the food was very good at Brooks, and you
filled out your own menu, what you wanted to select
from And he was always asking me for my pen or
pencil. I just, you know, after about the second
day, I told him to get his own and keep it. And then I
didn't let him use mine anymore. I would do or die.
If he didn't want to fill out his menu, that was his
problem. And I remember one guy, he got hit up on our
guy, and our guy with both his legs gone right up the
hip, he was asking for help. And our guy looked up at
him and said, what do you think you are, cripple or
something?
And it's a lot different when you have a large group
of severely injured people together because you
can always look around and find somebody worse off
than you are. It seems like y'all helped each other
more than anybody else could. Oh yeah. Just by
forcing each other to do things. That's just like
in college when you get a rough instructor if you
group together I had to work out the problems how to
pass the course. It's a lot easier doing it by
yourself. Yeah, I found that true in this one
history class that I just had.
Did you find that, back at Brooks, that being a
Vietnam veteran made a difference in your
relations with the hospital staff? No. If
anything, we were preference. Being combat
wounded could be preference over value, but
not very obvious. As far as your rehabilitation
programs, Did you ever have any encounter group
programs?
Initially, no.
I know one thing that
like when I found out that there were going to have
fireworks were out Beach Pavilion where a lot of
the people were and It was right next to the parade
field, and twice a year they would have fireworks
out there on the parade field. And I kept telling
the staff that, you know, be sure to tell everybody
there's going to be fireworks, because look out.
And the first couple times they sloughed it off,
and there was some real messes. Because the guy on
the first fireworks go off and boy the first thing
they do is get under their bed and it didn't matter
whether they were in tractions or what. And there
was some injuries caused from it and I don't know
why they kept the fireworks right there, right
next to Maine Hospital, but they did. Did you have
very much contact with veterans of other wars that
hadn't been in Vietnam? No, not a lot. Did, in your
relations with veterans who have been through
other wars, do you find that the Vietnam veterans
had a different view of the military?
Well, the normal, I say grunt, which means normal
infantry or whatever, they Roy did because they
thought it was a useless war and they were always
thrown into it. When I was a voluntarily enlisted
and I felt like I was doing good in Vietnam and I was
serving a purpose and most of the soldiers did not
feel this way. So I'm sort of oddball in that
respect. How does the presence of, like in the VA,
the presence of veterans from other wars, how do
they affect you? Well,
I wouldn't say that was a problem, but the problem
is that the VA handles all veterans, whether they
were in a war or not. And you take someone, well I
knew there at Brooke we had this one guy and wasn't
anything wrong. What happened was he got drunk in
France and climbed a power pole and touched a hot
wire and burned both his hands off. And when he got
out of the military. He got no military retirement
whatsoever, but he was 100% disabled by the
Veterans Administration. I'm only 80% disabled
by the Veterans Administration, and he has a lot
more privileges than I do.
It falls under the category, the first category
that they have is service-connected or
non-service-connected. His was
non-service-connected, but yet he has more
benefits than I do. And this I find fault with. And
there's a lot of people in the VA hospital are
non-service connected. And service connected
means where you are injured in the line of duty or
not, which can become quite touchy. What about
veterans who receive the benefit, but who in
reality really are not disabled? People such as
General Curtis LeMay, who claimed to be disabled,
but yet he still went on to get his pilot's license
and flies privately and was also a prospect for
vice presidential candidate. What is your
feelings about that? It's a way that a lot of people
get out paying extra income tax. It's a loophole in
the income tax system which causes this. Unless it
has nothing to do really with VA then. Oh, yes.
Because if the VA finds him disabled, say 30%
disabled, then 30% of his retirement pay is
non-taxable.
So what can I say about that? Do you think that's the
fault of the Internal Revenue Service or the fault
of the VA?
I don't know where the fault lies, but if, say, he
was 30% disabled, then
cause in line of duty and so on, I think then he
deserves it. But lots of times when, say, a general
goes in for an examination like that, he gets this
because he's a general. And rank has its
privileges.
While you were recuperating at Brooks, did you
ever have very much exposure to the outside world
as far as like passes and things? Oh yes. Was there
no difficulty there? Normally not. Two or three
times I got a thirty day convalescent leave. and
sometimes I went home or just flew all over the
country or whatever. And surprising as it may
seem, almost every place I went I was, because to
fly a military standby you have to do it in uniform,
and I was well received by all the The only place
that I wasn't well received was at Colorado
Springs, Colorado. And probably that was because
there were so many people there that were head to
Vietnam that they didn't know how to take me. And
when I was there I was on crutches without my
prosthesis. Yeah, Green Belay, they didn't know,
boy, how to take it. It's a little bit more
personal. Do you remember what your parents'
reactions were the first time they saw you after
your injury?
No, not really. Part of my injuries was I had
complete amnesia and when I woke up in the hospital
there at Clark Air Force Base, I didn't even know my
own name. And I was not a good patient there because
they were speaking basically Spanish there
because it was in the Philippines and I got that
confused with my Vietnamese if I was a prisoner of
war in North Vietnam. The only thing I wanted to do
was escape, and I was not a good patient.
As
far as your treatment went, what kind of
medication did they have you on?
Basically the only medication I was on was some
mild painkillers as Aspirin as I needed unless I
was in surgery or something and then I got heavy.